# 3.1 The formal specification of the type of natural numbers 

```agda
module 3-1 where

open import universe-levels
```

The type ℕ of **natural numbers** is the archetypal example of an inductive type. 
The rules we postulate for the type of natural numbers come in four sets, just as the rules for Π-types:

1. The formation rule, which asserts that the type ℕ can be formed.
2. The introduction rules, which provide the zero element 0_ℕ and the successor function succ_ℕ.
3. The elimination rule. This rule is the type theoretic version of the induction principle for ℕ.
4. The computation rules, which assert that any application of the elimination rule behaves as expected on the constructors 0_ℕ and succ_ℕ of ℕ.

## The formation rule of ℕ

The type ℕ is formed by the ℕ-**formation** rule

```text

  ---------- ℕ form 
   ⊢ ℕ type 
```
In other words, ℕ is postulated to be a type in the empty context.

## The introduction rules of ℕ

Unlike the set of positive integers in Bishop's remarks, Peano's first axiom postulates that 0 is a natural number. 
The introduction rules for ℕ equip it with the **zero element** and the **successor function**.

```text

  -----------
   ⊢ 0_ℕ : ℕ 
```

```text

  ------------------
   ⊢ succ_ℕ : ℕ → ℕ
```

```agda
data ℕ : Type lzero where
  zero-ℕ : ℕ
  succ-ℕ : ℕ → ℕ
```

### Remark 3.1.1

Every element in type theory always comes equipped with its type.
Therefore it is possible in type theory that all elements have a *unique* type.
In general, it is therefore good practice to make sure that every element is given a unique name, and in formalized mathematics in computer proof assistants this is even required. 
For example, the element 0_ℕ has type ℕ, and it is not also a type of ℤ. 
This is why we annotate the terms 0_ℕ and succ_ℕ with their type in the subscript. 
The type ℤ of the integers will be introduced in the next section, which will come equipped with a zero element zero_ℤ and a successor function succ_ℤ.
