# Section 7.3 The standard finite types

```agda
module section-7-3-the-standard-finite-types where
```

The standard finite sets are classically defined as the sets
`{x ∈ ℕ | x < k}`.
This leads to the question of how to interpret a subset `{x ∈ A | P(x)}` in
type theory.

Since type theory is set up in such a way that elements come equipped with their
types, subsets aren't formed the same way as in set theory, where the
comprehension axiom is used to form the set `{x ∈ A | P(x)}` for any predicate
`P` over `A`.
The Curry-Howard interpretation dictates that predicates are interpreted as
dependent types.
Therefore, a set of elements `x ∈ A` such that `P(x)` holds is interpreted in
type theory as the type of terms `x : A` equipped with an element, or proof,
`p : P(x)`.
In other words, we interpret a subset `{x ∈ A | P(x)}` as the type
`Σ(x : A) P(x)`.

## Remark 7.3.1

The alert reader may now have observed that the interpretation of a subset
`{x ∈ A | P(x)}` in type theory is the same as the interpretation of the
proposition `∃_(x ∈ A) P(x)`, while indeed the subset `{x ∈ A | P(x)}` has a
substantially different role in mathematics than the proposition
`∃_(x ∈ A) P(x)`.
This points at a slight problem of the Curry-Howard interpretation of the
existential quantifier.
While the Curry-Howard interpretation of the existential quantifier is
nevertheless useful and important, we will reinterpret the existential quantifier
in type theory in the later section on logic in type theory.

Since subsets are interpreted as `Σ`-types, the classical definition of the
standard finite types is

```text
  classical-Fin_k := Σ(x : ℕ) x < k.
```

This is a perfectly fine definition of the standard finite types.
However, the usual definition of the standard finite types in Martin-Löf's
dependent type theory is a more direct, recursive definition, which takes full
advantage of the inductive constructions of dependent type theory.

## Definition 7.3.2

We define the type family `Fin` of the **standard finite types** over `ℕ`
recursively by

```text
  Fin(0)     := ∅
  Fin(k + 1) := Fin(k) + 𝟙.
```

We will write `i` for the inclusion `inl : Fin(k) → Fin(k + 1)` and we will
write `⋆` for the point `inr(⋆)`.

In Exercise 7.7 you will be asked to show that the types `classical-Fin_k` and
`Fin(k)` are isomorphic.

## Remark 7.3.3

The type family `Fin` over `ℕ` can be given its own induction principle, which
is, at least for the time being, the principal way to make constructions on
`Fin(k)` for arbitrary `k : ℕ` and to prove properties about those
constructions.
The induction principle of the standard finite types tells us that the family of
standard finite types is inductively generated by

```text
  i : Fin(k) → Fin(k + 1)
  ⋆ : Fin(k + 1).
```

In other words, we can define a dependent function
`f : Π(k : ℕ) Π(x : Fin(k)) P_k(x)` by defining

```text
  g_k : Π(x : Fin(k)) P_k(x) → P_(k + 1)(i(x))
  p_k : P_(k + 1)(⋆)
```

for each `k : ℕ`.
The function `f` defined in this way then satisfies the judgmental equalities

```text
  f_(k + 1)(i(x)) ≐ g_k(x, f_k(x))
  f_(k + 1)(⋆)    ≐ p_k.
```

These judgmental equalities completely determine the function `f`, and therefore
we may also present such inductive definitions by pattern matching:

```text
  f_(k + 1)(i(x)) := g_k(x, f_k(x))
  f_(k + 1)(⋆)    := p_k.
```

We will often use definitions by pattern matching for two reasons: such
definitions are concise, and they display the judgmental equalities that hold
for the defined object.
Those judgmental equalities are the only thing we know about that object, and
proving a claim about it often amounts to finding a way to apply these
judgmental equalities.

To illustrate this way of working with the standard finite types, we define the
inclusion functions `Fin(k) → ℕ`, and show that these are injective.
In order to show that `nat-Fin_k` is injective, we will also show that
`nat-Fin_k` is bounded.

## Definition 7.3.4

We define the inclusion `nat-Fin_k : Fin(k) → ℕ` inductively by

```text
  nat-Fin_(k + 1)(i(x)) := nat-Fin_k(x)
  nat-Fin_(k + 1)(⋆)    := k.
```

## Lemma 7.3.5

The function `nat-Fin : Fin(k) → ℕ` is bounded, in the sense that
`nat-Fin(x) < k` for each `x : Fin(k)`.

## Proof

The proof is by induction.
In the base case there is nothing to show.
In the inductive step, we have the inequalities
`nat-Fin_(k + 1)(i(x)) ≐ nat-Fin_k(x) < k < k + 1`, where the first inequality
holds by the inductive hypothesis, and we also have

```text
  nat-Fin_(k + 1)(⋆) ≐ k < k + 1.
```

## Proposition 7.3.6

The inclusion function `nat-Fin_k : Fin(k) → ℕ` is injective, for each `k : ℕ`.

## Proof

We define a function
`α_k(x, y) : (nat-Fin_k(x) = nat-Fin_k(y)) → (x = y)` recursively by

```text
  α_(k + 1)(i(x), i(y), p) := ap i (α_k(x, y, p))
  α_(k + 1)(i(x), ⋆, p)    := ex-falso(f(p))
  α_(k + 1)(⋆, i(y), p)    := ex-falso(g(p))
  α_(k + 1)(⋆, ⋆, p)       := refl.
```

Here

```text
  f : (nat-Fin_(k + 1)(i(x)) = nat-Fin_(k + 1)(⋆)) → ∅
  g : (nat-Fin_(k + 1)(⋆) = nat-Fin_(k + 1)(i(y))) → ∅
```

are obtained from the fact that
`nat-Fin_(k + 1)(i(z)) ≐ nat-Fin_k(z) < k` for any `z : Fin(k)`, and the fact
that `nat-Fin_(k + 1)(⋆) ≐ k`.
