# Section 5.5 The uniqueness of refl

```agda
module section-5-5-the-uniqueness-of-refl where

open import universe-levels
open import section-4-6-dependent-pair-types
open import section-5-1-the-inductive-definition-of-identity-types
```

The identity type is an inductive *family* of types.
This has some subtle, but important implications.
For instance, while the type `a = x` indexed by `x : A` is inductively generated
by `refl`, the type `a = a` is *not* inductively generated by `refl`.
Hence we cannot use the induction principle of identity types to show that `p =
refl` for any `p : a = a`.
The obstacle, which prevents us from applying the induction principle of
identity types in this case, is that the endpoint of `p : a = a` is not free.

Nevertheless, the identity type `a = x` is generated by a single element `refl :
a = a`, so it is natural to wonder in what sense the reflexivity identification
is unique.
An identification with an element `a` is specified by first giving the endpoint
`x` with which we seek to identify `a`, and then giving the identification `p :
a = x`.
It is therefore only the pair `(a, refl)` which is unique in the type of all
pairs

```text
  (x, p) : Σ(x : A) a = x.
```

We prove this fact in the following proposition.

## Proposition 5.5.1

Consider an element `a : A`. Then there is an identification

```text
  (a, refl) = y
```

in the type `Σ(x : A) a ＝ x`, for any `y : Σ(x : A) a = x`.

## Proof

By `Σ`-induction it suffices to show that there is an identification

```text
  (a, refl) = (x, p)
```

for any `x : A` and `p : a = x`.
We proceed by the induction principle of identity types.
Therefore it suffices to show that

```text
  (a, refl) = (a, refl).
```

We obtain such an identification by reflexivity.

TODO: this proof does not exist in agda-unimath and was supplied by hand - see TODO in referneces
```agda
uniqueness-of-refl : {l : Level} {A : Type l} {a : A} → (y : Σ A (λ x → a ＝ x)) → ((a , refl) ＝ y)
uniqueness-of-refl (a , refl) = refl
```

## Unnumbered Remark

Proposition 5.5.1 shows that there is, up to identification, only one element in
`Σ`-type of the identity type. Such types are called contractible, and they are 
the subject of Chapter 10.

## Agda-unimath sources

TODO: This is the closest reference source I could find for this proof, but its not quite a correct source in that this file contains a proof that the type `Σ(x : A), a = x` is contractible, a notion that has not yet been defined
- The proof of Proposition 5.5.1 is contained in `foundation-core.torsorial-type-families`